Bible Basics
============

This is for Teddy and Kayleigh.  Mom and I raised you without any religion in
your lives.  I don't regret that, except for one thing: you likely never learned
many cultural references your peers take for granted.  I suspect that you
nonetheless recognized some things: Adam and Eve, Noah's ark.  But there are
others that probably fly past you: the Road to Damascus, cutting Samson's hair,
David and Bathsheba.  And still others are most likely  familiar, terms you know
and vaguely understand without the references: the Good Samaritan, the Prodigal
Son.

Teddy, you and I have talked about this a few times, and I said that I would try
to give you a shortened reading list, some Biblical material that's interesting
enough to read and not overwhelmingly full of tedium, theology, or
proselytizing, enough to give you a feel for the material and fill in some of
those cultural gaps.  I've spent a fair bit of time thinking about this, and
this is the result.  Of course, it is merely one person's list.  But I think
it's a good start.  Teddy, you might want to consult with Sarah for further
suggestions.  In this document, I try very hard to maintain a neutral stance,
not arguing for or against any particular interpretation of the Bible, nor even
making a theism/atheism stand.  Even if I disagree with the text, I present it
as straightforwardly as possible.

I also ordered a book that you might want to read, which attempts to gather the
most significant Biblical stories into a single place.  I'd like to read it
myself, and then you're welcome to borrow it.  *[Biblical Literacy: The
Essential Bible Stories Everyone Needs to Know][bl]*.

Note that I am not trying to give the Cliff Notes version of the Bible.  While I
hope this gives you some feel for the scope of the Bible, I am much more focused
on those parts that will likely come up in everyday interactions.

My list of suggestions is below, but first, an overview of the Bible.




The Bible
---------


### Bible Structure ###

The Bible is divided into *books*.  They vary in length, in style, in content.
Some are full of stories, and feel similar to Greek Mythology collections.  Some
give a history of sorts of the Jewish people.  Others are full of rules and
admonitions.  Psalms is a collection of poems of praise for God; Proverbs, a
collection of teachings   There are books full of prophecy.  The book of Job
(rhymes with *lobe*) is entirely the story of the trials and tribulations -- and
eventual triumphs -- of a man subject to a bet between God and the devil about
whether he'd forsake God if he loses everything he cherishes.  There are the
four Gospels, which from various different perspectives describe the life,
death, and ministry of Jesus of Nazareth, who Christians believe to be the
long-prophesied Messiah (aka Christ).  There is a book full of the activities of
his disciples after his death.  Many books are letters of advice to early
Christian congregatiosn.  The final book, Revelations is an extended prophecy
about the end times that a sizable subset of Christians believe is coming.

The books of the Bible are divided into chapters and chapters into verses.
Citations almost always use these.  Verses are short, often single sentences.
Chapters vary a bit more, but they act much like chapters in a novel; convenient
places to break.  Chapters and verses are later additions to the text, not in
the original sources.  Occassionally there are strange breaks where a complete
thought is split across verses or two bits of unrelated content are combined
into one.  But mostly they are helpful.

The bible contains over 750,000 words, longer than I novel I've ever read (and
I've read War and Peace!)  But for comparison, the five books published in A
Song of Ice and Fire so far (aka The Game of Thrones series) has well over twice
that.  You've both read the Harry Potter series.  Those combine for more than a
million words.  So reading the whole Bible is not impossible, but it's not
nearly as easy as reading those works.  Those are simple narratives.  The bible
is full of other, less pleasurable sections.  The first nine chapters of 1
Chronicles, for instance, have a combined total of 7,000 words, that all read
like this:

> And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth:
> her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon. And when Azubah was dead,
> Caleb took unto him Ephrath, which bare him Hur. And Hur begat Uri, and Uri
> begat Bezaleel. And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the
> father of Gilead, whom he married when he was threescore years old; and she bare
> him Segub. And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of
> Gilead.

So there are parts difficult to read.  And to me, most of these are devoid of
interesting content.  If you want a very short synopsis of any of the books, I
found a very [useful page][66b] that gives simple, short overviews of each of
the books.  It might be worth reading.

Do note that my own list below is not a small amount of reading.  The first book
I recommend is Genesis, which at more than 38,000 words, is the length of a long
novella.  But altogether, they are a far cry from 750,000!



### Translations ###

There are many dozens, perhaps hundreds, of translations in English alone.

By far the best known is The King James version (aka the Authorized Version).
The language is old and dated, but for many English-speaking Christians, this is
the definitive version.  It uses *thee*/*thou*/*thy*, and to a modern ear this
might sound like more formal language; don't fall for that.  You've both studied
French.  These have fallen out of usage in modern English, but when this
translation was made, English still had the equivalent of *tutoiement* (when to
use *tu*) and *vouvoiement* (when to use *vous*).  *Thou* and the like were the
less formal, more personal words.

When I was still a theist, I was a fan of The Revised Standard version, which
was a fairly scholarly version.  The New International Version was meant to be
as easy to read as possible; it used to be the version of choice among
evangelical Christians.  A more recent version is the World English Bible, which
was designed to be a readable, modern version, not subject to copyright
problems, and so easy to post on the Web.

You know I've fiddled around with [TiddlyWiki][tw].  One of the projects I've
worked on is to have simple online versions of some Bible translations.  It's
still a work in progress, but there are four English and two Spanish
translations [currently available][twb].  These include the [World English][web]
and [King James][kjb] versions.  I would recommend that you choose one of these
two translations.  King James is best known, and to many readers, the most
poetic.  World English is simply easier to read.  Feel free to read content on
my site as you like; they download easily to any device with a web browser.  But
there are also printed versions availble in your households.


### The Old Testament ###

The first part of the Bible is Jewish scripture that was written between 1300
BCE and 50 BCE.  This is commonly called the Old Testament, a name which,
although ubiquitous may sound insulting to Jewish ears.  This consists of a few
unofficial sections:


#### The Law ####

The first five books, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deutoronomy,
cover the creation story, the initial generations of humanity, the foundation of
God's chosen nation of Israel by the descendents of Abraham, their years of
exile and slavery in Egypt, their dramatic escape, and their forty years of
wandering the wilderness.  It also includes the laws to govern the people, both
the general Ten Commandments and many more specific rules.  God grants the
descendents of Abraham a land of their own, Israel.  These five books constitute
one of the main components of Jewish scripture, called the *Torah*.


#### History ####

These books, from Joshua through Esthe, discuss the the subsequent history of
the people of Israel, living first under the rule of the tribes' judges and
eventually consolidating under the King Saul.  When he loses favor with God,
David becomes King, and his son Solomon after him.  David is a central figure in
the Old Testament; he's credited with many of the Psalms and future kings are
desribed by their lineage from David, including the New Testament's Jesus.
Others list their *bona fides* as being a "child of David".  Eventually the
territory splits into separate states of Israel and Judah, both containing the
people of God, descendents of Abraham.


#### Poetry and Wisdom ####

This slightly eclectic group includes Psalms, Proverbs, and Job, already
described above, as well as Ecclesiastes, which to my mind has some of the best
poetry in the Bible, and The Song of Solomon (aka The Song of Songs), which is a
long love poem, with some actual racy bits in it.  Lamentations, which is as sad
as it sounds, is sometimes included in this list.


#### The Prophets ####

These books describe a series of preachers/prophets who try to bring the people
of Israel and Judah back to following God, with varying degress of success.  The
people are often swayed to worship the gods of the neighboring (or conquering)
communities, and the prophets have to work hard to convince them to come back.
Sometimes the prophets themselves are not particularly willing.  The books are
often divided into Major and Minor Prophets, in part by the lengths of their
texts.  The Majors are Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekial, and Daniel, and if
Lamentations is not included the poetry section, it is included here, attributed
to Jeremiah.  The other twelve are the Minors, including the short book of
Jonah, which tells of a prophet fleeing from God's exhortation to go to a city
and preach, who ends up overboard and in the belly of a whale until he repents
and is spit back out, and ends up converting the people of that city.


### The Apocrypha ###

There are a collection of Bible books that in some versions are placed between
the Old and New Testaments.  Catholic Bibles tend to include them, and
Protestant ones do not.  The Protestants removed them, saying that the original
sources of these books were unclear, and that perhaps they were not divinely
inspired.  While some of them are interesting in their own right, we will not
bother with them here.



### The New Testament ###

Christianity started as an offshoot of Judaism.  The second half of the Bible is
the story of the origins of Christianity as well of some of its theology.  Most
of these books were written between 20 and 120 years after the death of Jesus.


#### The Gospels ####

The first four books of the New Testament are called the Gospels ("good news").
They tell the story of the ministry of Jesus, a rabbi who wandered around
teaching, healing, performing miracles, and preaching an unorthodox theology.
Much of his teaching was in the form of morality tales called parables.  His
theology riled up the more orthodox Jews and they in turn riled up the Roman
overlords.  Together they tried Jesus for heresy/rebellion, and executed him.
According to these gospels, he rose from the dead on the third day and appeared
to many of his disciples.  These four books are not sequential; they are
different views on the same events.  Mark is the most raw, with significant
narrative issues and a focus on secret knowledge.  Matthew is a more polished
version of the same approach, with an emphasis on Jesus as the Jewish Messiah.
Luke is more day-to-day, and focuses more on Jesus as a traditional Rabbi, and
as the savior of all people, not just the Jews.  John is much more theological,
and focuses on Jesus as being part of God.


#### History ####

The Acts of the Apostles is the story of the first generation of Jesus's
followers after his death.  Some were among his twelve disciples; others
converted after he was gone.  They wandered around preaching and also performing
miracles.  They converted various people, but were also persecuted and often
martyred for their faith.  An important story is the conversion of one of their
persecutors, a Roman named Saul of Tarsus, later known as Paul, to Christianity.


#### Epistles ####

The Epistles are letters written from various early Christian figures,
especially the important people from Acts, to various Christian communities that
had been founded by the apostles.  They offer encouragement, theology, and
practical advice.  They attempt to settle disputes.  Many of these letters are
written by Paul, and the theology he espouses becomes an important part of
Christian thought from then on.  These books make up the majority of the New
Testament.


#### Prophecy ####

The sole book here is Revelations.  This is a long prophecy about the end-time
battle between the forces of God and the forces of the Anti-Christ, as well as
the signs the will precede it.




The Reading List
----------------

Here are suggested Books/Chapters to read.  Each is annotated with some
phrases/names that you could well run across in other contexts.

### Old Testament ###

* **Genesis** (38,000 words):  This is the origin story... of everything.
  * The Garden of Eden
  * Adam and Eve
  * The Great Flood
  * Noah's Ark
  * The Tower of Babel
  * Sodom and Gomorrah
  * Lot
  * Abraham
  * Abraham and Isaac
  * Joseph and the Pharaoh


* **Exodus** (33,000 words): The Israelites become slaves in Egypt.  Moses leads
  them to the gates of the Promised Land.
  * Moses
  * Plagues of Egypt
  * Parting of the Red Sea
  * The Ten Commandments
  * Manna from heaven
  * Forty years in the wilderness


* **Judges 13-16** (3,000 words): Samson
  * Samson and the lion
  * Samson and Delilah


* **1 Samuel 9 - 24** (14,000 words): Uniting the tribes under a king.  Saul
  falling into disfavor, battles between Saul and David.
  * Saul
  * David
  * David and Goliath


* **2 Samuel 11 - 12** (2,000 words): David, the most famous king of the Hebrews
  * David and Bathsheba.  You may not recognize the name, but you have heard the
    Leonard Cohen song, Hallelujah, at least in the [Rufus Wainwright
    version][rwv] used in Shrek.  These lyrics refer to the story here:
    > ```
    > Your faith was strong but you needed proof
    > You saw her bathing on the roof
    > Her beauty and the moonlight overthrew you
    > ```


* **1 Kings 1 - 9** (10,000 words): Solomon, the building of the temple
  * Solomon
  * Splitting the baby
  * Building of the temple


* **2 Kings 1 - 2** (1,500 words): Elijah and Elisha, passing the torch, typical
  important prohets
  * Elijah, chariot of fire
  * Elisha


* **Jonah** (1,300 words): Jonah, typical(ish) minor propet
  * Jonah and the whale


* **Psalms** (total of 4,000 words in these selections): It's probably worth
  reading more than the seven listed here, but a scattershot approach would be
  fine; skip around and read a few others.  Too many at once does get to feel
  very repetitive, though.  I don't have a list of personal favorites, and only
  the first one clearly *had* to be included.  For the others, I just found a
  few best-of lists online and included those which appeared in a majority of
  those lists' top ten, except the last one, which I added for the reason listed
  with it.
  * **Psalm 23**: This is by *far* the best-known Psalm.  You may well recognize
    the opening lines, or even the whole thing.  The concept of the "good shepherd" 
    appears many places in the Bible, but this is an important one.
  * **Psalm 1**
  * **Psalm 37**
  * **Psalm 46**
  * **Psalm 119**: This is the only Psalm with a significant internal structure;
    it feels almost like epic poetry.  It's also 50% longer than all the others
    on this list combined.
  * **Psalm 139**
  * **Psalm 137**: I include this one *because* of its contradictions.  There
    are all sorts of passages in the Old Testament.  This is a microcosm of the
    whole thing.  The first four verses are among the most beautiful, haunting,
    poetic lines in the entire Bible.  The next three verses are *meh*.  But the
    last two verses are cruel, xeonophobic calls for infanticide.  Quite the
    variety for one short poem.


* **Ecclesiastes** (6,000 words): Feel free to skim, but do read Chapter 1 and
  Chapter 3:1-10.  This is to my mind the most poetic book in the bible, more so
  than Psalms, Song of Solomon, or Lamentations.
  * Nothing new under the sun
  * More lyrics you'll recognize, as long as you include Pete Seeger's "Turn,
    turn turn" addition, as [performed by The Byrds][ttt] 


### New Testament ###

#### Gospels ####
Of the four gospels, I have a soft spot for the more raw **Mark**, myself, but
**Matthew** and **Luke** are better intros.  I chose Matthew over Luke, simply
becasue we will also discuss the book of Acts.  That is mostly a continuation of
Luke; so we'll see his style elsewhere.  But two chapters from Luke are also
listed below because of well-known references not covered in Matthew.  **John**
is much more theological, and interesting mostly to believers.  Matthew, Mark,
and Luke overlap a great deal, and most scholars believe that Matthew and Luke
were partially based on Mark.  Matthew is most focused on Jesus as a Jew, and
the fulfillment of Jewish prophecies.  Luke is a bit more journalistic, more
globally focused; it reads a bit like I imagine a celebrity biography might
read.  

Each of these books tells the story of Jesus, the son of a carpenter from
Nazareth, who became an itinerant rabbi.  He gathered together a number of
followers, most prominently the Twelve Apostles.  He wandered the Jewish lands,
healing the sick and performing other miracles, preaching a view that placed
love above the law.  To most Christians, he was the prophecied Messiah, God's
literal presence on Earth.  Jesus taught often in morality tales known as
parables.  A number of these will be familiar.  Jesus is tried for heresy and
rebellion and executed.  But according to these gospels he rose again and
visited with his disciples before ascending into heaven.

* **Matthew** (24,000 words): There is much here, but the philosophy of Jesus
  may best be described by Matthew 22:35-40: 
    > Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him,
    > and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the law?  Jesus said
    > unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
    > all thy soul, and with all thy mind.  This is the first and great
    > commandment.  And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour
    > as thyself.  On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
  * Christmas (*sans* Santa)
  * John the Baptist
  * 40 days in the desert
  * Temptations of Christ
  * Sermon on the Mount
  * The Lord's Prayer
  * Miraculous healings
  * Calming the storm
  * Casting out demons
  * Raising the dead
  * Twelve Disciples
  * Pharisees
  * Parables
  * Multiplying loaves and fishes
  * "Suffer little children"
  * Rich men and camels
  * The first shall be last and the last shall be first
  * Woe unto you, lawyers and Pharisees
  * The Last Supper
  * Judas, betrayal
  * Crucifixion
  * Empty Tomb and resurrection


* **Luke 10** (900 words)
  * The Good Samaritan

* **Luke 15** (725 words)
  * The Prodigal Son

* **Acts of the Apostles** (24,000 words)  Honestly, this book is the only part
  of this list that might be better in a [Spark Notes version][sna]; it does get
  tedious.  But it's also important for understanding Christianity.  This is the
  story of the spread of Christianity from a small Jewish sect in a tiny Israeli
  community to a widespread network across a fair swath of Mediterranean coast
  and beyond, becoming less Jewish along the way.  Jesus's disciples and other
  new followers are able to perform similar miracles to his, and their following
  grows.  They are also often persecuted and sometimes killed.  The conversion
  of Saul of Tarsus on the road to Damascus turns him into a zealous missionary
  (now named Paul), and he becomes a major contributor the religion's spread.
  * The Road to Damascus: This is a phrase you may run across.  It's associated
    with sudden revelation and drastic turn-abouts.  Even if you only skim Acts
    or read the spark notes, it's probably worth reading this story (Chapter 9)
    in its entirety.


#### Epistles ####

The remainder of the New Testament, except for the last book, **Revelations**,
consists of letters to existing Christian communities.  They are attributed to
various of Jesus's disciples and later converts.  Paul, who we read about in
Acts is responsible for many of them (traditionally thirteen, scholars say seven
to ten.)  Read them if you want to understand a bit more about Christian ideas,
but feel free to skip them otherwise.  The point of this document is mostly
cultural references, and there are not many in these selections that you need to
know for that.  The two passages that I think might be more familiar are noted.

These letters are the oldest known Christian writing, dating between 50 and 100
AD.  Christian theology is based on the teachings of Jesus, but it is worked out
in much more detail in some of these letters.  We might say that Jesus was a Jew
and the first real "Christian" was Paul.  Where Jesus taught that doing the
right thing was only the first step and you also had to be right in your heart
and in your faith, Paul's message is chiefly that faith is all that's needed.
Other letters disagree, notably James, and it's amidst such tensions that
Christianity grew in its first two or three generations.

* **Romans** (9,500 words): Righteousness comes only from God.  The importance
  of faith.  Salvation.

* **1 Corinthians** (9,400 words): Instructions on worship, sin, sexuality, righteousness.
  * Chapter 13 is short and worth a read.  It will probably be quoted at half
    the weddings you'll attend in your life.  If you're reading the King James
    translation, substitute in "love" wherever you read "charity".

* **Hebrews** (6,900 words): "Jesus is the bestest of the best, so cool!"

* **James** (2,300 words): Temptation, sin, and wisdom.  Faith without works is
  dead.  This seems in clear contrast to Paul's ideas, as seen in Romans and 1
  Corinthians.

* **1 John** (2,500 words): Obedience, love, eternal life
  * 1 John 4:7-8 reads
    > Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that
    > loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not
    > God; for God is love.
    
    and this is a classic Christian idea, and a very popular quote.


Summary
-------

I think I've done a reasonable job of my main goal: selecting passages which
give you insight into Western cultural references that are widely used, but
possibly mysterious to the two of you.  Having been raised without these
associations is no major social handicap, but understanding them may well turn
out to be useful.

A secondary goal was to give you some sense of the style, scope, and contents of
the Bible, while including little of the tedium.  A part of me wants to fiddle
with this as long as possible.  There's always things that might be worth
changing.  I'm second-guessing myself on excluding Proverbs and Song of Solomon.
I think maybe I included too much of the Saul and David stories.  And maybe I
should get Daniel and the lions in there...  It will never be perfect, and the
appropriate amount for Teddy may be too much for Kayleigh.  Or the varied
literary forms which might amuse Kayleigh could just be an annoyance to Teddy.
I'm hoping not.  But we can talk about it whenever, if you find you want a
different reading list.


You'll notice that these passages still total 193,000 words, or 163,000 if you
skip the Epistles.  While those are large numbers, they're about the same length
as Goblet of Fire and Half-Blood Prince, respectively.  This is an investment of
time, but not an overwhelming one.  We also generally avoid the most tedious
material -- of which the Bible contains plenty.

So, enjoy!



  [66b]: https://www.gotquestions.org/66-books-of-the-Bible.html
  [bl]: https://isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780061718670
  [kjb]: https://crosseye.github.io/TW5-Bibles/KingJames/
  [rwv]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xR0DKOGco_o
  [tw]: https://tiddlywiki.com
  [twb]: https://crosseye.github.io/TW5-Bibles/
  [ttt]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xVOJla2vYx8
  [web]: https://crosseye.github.io/TW5-Bibles/WorldEnglish/
